when non-black students were integrated into an
all-white school after the 1954 Supreme Court
ruling that separate was not equal and we should
integrate with all deliberate speed, right?
That's right. Okay. Well, do you want to start by
telling us something about your background,
about your education and your term as mayor and a
little bit about the background of the Little Rock
crisis? Born and raised in Little Rock. Went to
public schools there. Graduated Little Rock
Central High School in 1934. Went to University of
Illinois. Graduated in 38 and worked in Chicago.
Served as a naval officer in World War II and came
back to Little Rock in December 1945. Became
active in politics.
Were you active in politics before you were mayor?
Oh, yes. What kind of things did you do? Active in
the Democratic Party, supporting and raising
money for people seeking office on all levels, and
then decided in 1955 to run for mayor of Little
Rock. had planned to, within two to four years, run
for governor of the state. That was my plan. Could
you tell us a little bit about the background
between the court case and when Faubus called in
the guard? Well, when the Supreme Court ruled in
1954 that the
doctrine had been in effect for oh well and
accessible hundred years that equal but separate
facilities for whites and blacks was the way to run
the educational system. Their decision changed
it and said that the facilities for blacks were not
equal to and in effect said that since the states
are not willing nationwide to provide the money
for blacks, that they were being deprived of their
constitutional right for equal facilities for
education, and that there should be a gradual
integration of students regardless of color. And
it was a very controversial decision in all parts
of the country, not just the South.
But since it was rooting of the Supreme Court,
the states then and the individual school
districts across the country began to put
together gradual integration plans. At that
particular time, a friend of mine named Bert
Blossom was the superintendent of schools in
Pulaski County.
Even though he did not agree with the Supreme Court
ruling, he accepted it as a so-called law of the
land and
put together a gradual plan that by meetings
throughout the community, radio and television,
over a period of a couple of years, the public knew
about it. And there appeared to be no
reason to believe that the plan which was adopted
by the school board unanimously would meet any
objection in the community or the city. Is this the
way you felt? Any violence. That's what the school
board felt. The school board voted unanimously
after carrying it to the community. and even the
newspapers agreed that the plan would be
acceptable.
Governor Faubus, who was already a controversial
figure and was completing his first term as
governor, had already agreed, or his second term
as governor, has already agreed to step down and
not seek re-election. And
he decided with half a dozen or so friends that they
would oppose the school board's decision or plan.
He did this in such a dramatic fashion that he went
on television on Sunday night before schools were
to be integrated the following day in September of
1957. And he said that there was rioting, that
people across the country, across Arkansas and
the whole state, the whole country would be coming
in. There would be rioting on the streets and that
people would be killed and slaughtered and so
forth and so on. You say that perpetrated fraud
upon the people of Little Rock particularly and
the country as a whole because claim to those of us
in the state involved with what was happening,
that he was using this to perpetuate himself in
offices as long as he wanted to be governor of the
state of Marksville, which happened. He called in
2,000 National Guardmen, and they surrounded the
school.
Were these half a dozen friends, were they
political figures also or just personal friends
of his? No, we met on what he announced on Sunday
evening. And we called a meeting that night. And
the governor of the state, no, the ex-governor of
the state, Sid McMahon, the Lieutenant Governor
of the state, I can't remember his name, one of the
Senators, Congressman Brooks Hayes,
Virgil Blossom, and most of the school board were
present. And we
were there to make some kind of decision how to meet
the crisis that was certain to arise because the
school was already surrounded. Because he came on
television and said the school was surrounded
just when it was. They were surrounded. Didn't he
warn that blood would run in the streets of Little
Rock if the blacks tried to enter the school? Yes.
How did the crowd react to the guards being around
the school? I mean, the guards themselves
wouldn't let the kids through. And I read that one
girl, Elizabeth Eckford, I believe is her name,
came up and thought that the guards would protect
her because she didn't realize what had been said
in the student
superintendent meeting. And she had tried to go
through to the school anyway and felt that even the
guards were giving her hate stares. Do you think
that the guards had? They were there to keep them
out. The guard was there to keep them out of school.
But do you think that the guards had their, I mean,
in their own opinion, were the guards against the
National Guard? It's hard to say. It's hard to
determine if the 2,000 were for or against it, but
they had no choice. They were members of the
National Guard, and they were called out by the
government of the state. They had to be there. But
they were instructed not to let them in school, not
to escort them in. The only way in the world, this
was a decision that was made that night, that the
only way in the world they were going to get in was
that, and this was done with Washington, D.C.'s
approval. We were dealing directly with, at that
point, Richard Nixon, who was vice president.
Attorney General. I can't remember his first
name. His last name was Rogers. I can't remember
his first name. But it was determined that they
would provide U.S. Marshals
to assist those nine students. Did you call the
President and ask him for support? Well, it was a
spontaneous situation. The decision was made
that night that we had to take immediate action and
do something. Otherwise, we would have an awful
lot of trouble. How long after the nine children
tried to enter the school against the National
Guard did it take before the troops came down and
they actually got to go inside? I think a week or so.
I'm not real sure. I'm not real sure. It didn't go on
very long because nothing could happen. One of the
things we would say, we called out Well, there were
about 350 policemen at that particular time,
about 350 firemen. And part of the plan agreed on
was that we would call, use approximately 75% of
the police force and the firemen, the police force
with no guns, only with their, what do you call
those? Not what you call the clubs or so forth and so
on. They weren't called that. And the firemen only
with fire hoses. And... Is that to ward off the mob?
Yes, to prevent any mob violence and so forth and so
on. But definitely no shooting because that would
defeat what we're trying to do and that is to
preserve peace and order and no violence and
people being killed or injured. And... The
strange thing about the whole situation was that
when I, as mayor, ordered this to be done, the chief
of police and the chief of the fire department both
resigned. They would not do it. Because they
didn't believe in the desegregation. Didn't
believe in it. And we had to bring in assistance.
How do you feel that this integration or the
desegregation of Central High School could have
taken place without the guard? Do you think it
would have gone over smoothly? No problem. You
don't think there would have been any problem?
Whatever.
The responsibility of the individual school
districts was spelled out. the governor of the
state and the federal government had no business
at all interfering. It was not their
responsibility. It was the responsibility of the
board members and they'd already arrived at a
plan. It had taken two years to make certain that
the public agreed with and was familiar with the
plan and that it would come off according to the way
it had been explained many, many, many times. And
had this action not been taken by the governor,
there's no doubt in question at that time and now
that it would have gone, you know, maybe some
minor, but nothing unusual. Did you hear any
rumors or anything of any violence that would have
happened? Like, I mean, I know Fava's blew it way
out of proportion that you didn't hear of hardly
any. So, um... Oh, he had brought in 15 or 20
people with a reputation of being
rabble-rousers, we call them, to excite and
incite rioting. As a matter of fact, the FBI knew
that. And that was our job, to make certain that...
bob did get excited and of course when it came on
television the next morning there were triple
thousand people out there just you know just going
crazy you know going crazy i know there's so many
people out there against the desegregation but
were there a lot of people in the community that
were for it that believed in it or were they most
most of the most of the black people were obviously
uh And a small percentage of the white people. You
couldn't tell what percent. A lot of them didn't
want to say anything because... A lot of people
didn't care. Didn't bother. Didn't make a
difference. What role do you feel that the media
played in the... Did you think it was good or bad? I
know that it showed the whole world. Grossly
over-exaggerated. Oh, really? Locally,
statewide, worldwide. You think it helped any?
Grossly. All it did was... bring the situation to
the attention of people that should have never
been concerned about it, people that lived in
other parts of the country, people who got
involved that should have given it a second
thought. It was a local matter. Just grossly
over-exaggerated.
The morning after it happened, after they
integrated the school? After that particular day
in September, the morning after it happened,
there must have been 150 newsmen from all over the
world in the mayor's office with television
cameras. That's when I first met John Chancellor.
Oh, really? I met him that day, and he was just a
young man getting started. But they had him all
over the world. They just wanted a scoop. They
wanted some juicy gossip. That was it. That was the
biggest news item worldwide. You were saying
earlier that people just weren't accustomed to
having blacks have any kind of freedom about
eating lunch at any counters. No, no. Up until that
point,
the black people... all over the country,
particularly the South. They didn't eat in
restaurants. They didn't go to picture shows and
sit in balconies. Public transportation, they
sat in the back, including railroads, airplanes.
And they were discriminated against. Had any of
this started changing yet by the time that this
little rock? Really not. I know one of the things
that when I went in office as mayor in January of 56,
for 150 years, the fountain, public fountains,
water fountains, they were separate for black and
for white. Restrooms were black and white, you
know. We changed them all. During your... Within
the first week. Oh. Within the first week, we
changed. This was something that was done because
I felt they were citizens of the city and that they
paid taxes like anybody else and that there was no
reason why when they walked in the city hall for any
reason that they should have to go to a separate
restroom or go to a... break water out of a
separate... And there was nothing said about it.
ignore press it was a lot of people felt
differently that they should be different that
they were different people How did you come to be so
open-minded? Was it from your parents' views or
from school or just your own personal
disposition? No, I had grown up in a family of
modest men. My father was in the commercialized
business all of his adult life. He hired and worked
with 15 to 25 people, and they were both black and
white. And I didn't have any particular feelings
about either way. I didn't realize in growing up
what it meant to be discriminated against at that
particular time. That's a neat view to see because
you hardly ever hear about anyone who was
open-minded about race relations at all during
that time. Well, I went to school at the University
of Illinois at North. I went to elementary and high
school in Arkansas. There were no blacks in
school. I went up there in almost every class. Uh,
we would have a few black students involved with
me. You know, some a reason why it should. They were
just as radiant or more so than most of the white
kids in college. They really didn't bother me. And
I'd worked in Chicago and Illinois for four years
before I went in service. Same thing, I worked with
blacks. They mostly were white. I was a naval
officer in World War II. And the same thing, we had
black officers on the Admiral Dempsey's staff,
which I served on for 18 or 19 months. And it didn't
bother me. It really didn't bother me. Did it seem
to bother other people that were on the staff with
you? No. They were accepted, you know. How was
Horace Mann High School? Was it in the books? Just
as good or better than Little Rock High School.
Just as good or better. A lot of the arguments seem
to be that they had such a good high school, why did
they want to come to the white high school that had
more people and was older, not well-equipped? Was
it separate but equal? It was equal. In what ways?
Equal facilities. Probably... 90% of the black
students going to Horseman High School did not
want to go because they realized that they were not
wanted there. They realized that. The nine
students that started it? Well, 90% of the
students at Horseman High School and other high
schools realized they were not wanted. And
they're no different than anybody else. You don't
associate people that you don't particularly
feel comfortable with. And they were the same way,
exactly. But the National Association, what do
they call it now? The NAACP was in its infancy at
that particular time. And there was a nationwide
movement, one of which was Martin Luther King.
There was a nationwide movement to do something
about civil rights, and education was where they
wanted to start, which I did not agree with. I don't
agree with today that you shouldn't take children
and use them to advance the cause of the people as a
rule. They should have taken grown people if they
wanted to bring about equal civil rights and not
use children, young children, six, eight, 10, 12,
up through high school age, And I still remember
that night when the NAACP was organized to do this
very thing. And this Daisy Bates that you referred
to a while ago, she was the leader. of the local
community from NAACP. Oh, yeah. She was the
leader. Well, was she a journalist also for a
newspaper or something? Oh, you don't know? OK. We
don't know that. But they were intent on seeing
that schools were integrated. The kids could make
a difference. They were satisfied with where they
were. How were those nine kids selected? Do you
remember? I don't know that. You don't know? I'm
sure they had to volunteer because they knew there
was going to be some problems. Did you ever meet
those nine children? Never did. So, but you know
that they, I mean, just from general, I mean, the
general feeling that no one would want to be placed
in that situation, but did you ever hear... I don't
think they wanted to. But did you ever hear any
stories about how they felt, if they were scared or
proud to be the ones to make the difference? I think
at that time, papers, radio and television
interviewed them and... that they were concerned
and afraid that they would be hurt. Had to be
because even after the federal government sent in
troops and stayed there for the rest, they stayed
there the entire term. They stayed there through
June, May of 1958. The troops then? The federal
troops stayed that long. They were guarded in the
classrooms, and they were guarded when they left
the school. How were they received by the white
students and the faculty? Was that all a farce
because of the guards, or were they just not well
received? Students didn't receive, didn't
welcome the law. Most of them didn't. A handful
did. The faculty mixed. Couldn't do much about it.
In the lunchroom and places like that, did they eat
separately? At a separate time or just off in a
group by themselves? Separately. They did that in
order to prevent any trouble. That's a good idea.
Would you say, then you would definitely say that
these students were even more segregated within
the white school than they were outside? When we
were talking about Hortzman High School, what
kind of, did they have a mixed faculty or was it all
black? All black. All black administration and
everything? Everything.
Okay. What other individuals do you think played a
big part in the, for or against the desegregation
movement. We mentioned Daisy Bates and Virgil
Bloom. Blossom. Blossom. You mean locally or?
Well, either.
You mentioned Martin Luther King. I think the... I
think that the, on the federal government level,
between Richard Nixon and William Rogers, his
name, he was attorney general, Bill Rogers at that
particular time, they, they expressly felt that
the Supreme Court ruling was the law of the land,
which was questionable that it was the law of the
land, and that they were It was their intent to see
that, regardless of what took them, and do it, that
it was going to be enforced, which was a great
mistake, a great mistake. How do you think they
should have gone about this whole situation? How
do you think it would have been better or easier?
Let the individual school boards across the
United States take care of their own plan, and we
wouldn't have had any problem at all. How long do
you think it would have taken for the, especially
the southern schools, to be integrated if they had
gone at their own pace or own speed? Faster than it
took. than it is what it has to last 25 years, 30
years. Because they feel like it's something they
have to do. Because any time you're forced to do
anything, there's going to be resentment. And
this was forced down the throats of the people
across the country, north, south, east, and west.
The North wasn't that different from the South as
far as when it came to forced integration. But they
try to make themselves seem better. People in the
North were opposed to it more than the people in the
South.
The only reason the South got the attention
because that's where, at that time, a great
percentage of the black people lived. There
weren't that many percentage-wise in the North
and the East and the West, but they were bitterly
opposed to it and it took them longer to achieve
what degree of integration we have today. You said
that the Guard stayed until May of 1958? No, no, no.
The National Guard only stayed about a week or so
until the Federal Troops moved in. Okay, but the
Federal Troops stayed? The Federal Troops stayed
when Eisenhower ordered Federal Troops in, and I
can't remember how many there were, but they
stayed until... School term was out in May. By the
following year. And is that when the school was
shut down that next term? There was no school at all
for two years. There was no high school at all.
None. Every high school was closed. In Little Rock
or in Arkansas? In Little Rock. Because of the
problem. How did the faculty and the students feel
about the guards? Did they resent that or did they
take that resentment that they had for the guards
if there was any out on the black students because
they were the whole reason that they were there?
Well, I didn't actually talk to faculty members,
but I'm certain that they did not agree with either
the state or the federal government getting
involved in the school administration properly,
because that's strictly a local responsibility.
The Constitution of the state of Arkansas and
every other state in the union provides
specifically for how schools are administered.
that a local school board, elected by the public,
has full responsibility. And the state has no
responsibility, and the federal government has
no responsibility. His father saw an opportunity
to grab hold of something that was highly, highly
emotional at the time, and used it to its fullest
extent, perpetuated himself an officer for the
next eight years.
That was his only purpose. Only purpose. I can't
believe that. Did people support Faubus's
actions, the state in general, the community?
Those who didn't support him kept quiet because it
was highly controversial, highly
controversial. If you publicly pick a position,
which a lot of us did, who because of the position in
public life had to, then we became controversial.
And you were either... considered to be a pretty
good fella or you were a pretty bad fella. And it was
decided a lot by that. Absolutely. Was it totally
by that? Absolutely. I had friends and even family
members that wouldn't speak to me for two or three
years because of that. They wouldn't speak to you
because they felt differently or because they
were afraid to speak out in favor of you? Both.
Both? Both. How was your family treated during
this time? I read an article about a cross being
burned in your front yard, and I know that your son
went to high school there. Persecuted.
Persecuted. Was it rough? Real rough? Tense? Not
really. Not really? Not really when you consider
the reason for it. People did things they wouldn't
have done otherwise. But people in your own
church, in your own circle of friends,
didn't associate with you. They were... I think
they were really afraid that they would be drawn
into something that was not their business.
I was concerned about it, but not to any great
degree. Did they not speak to you even to the extent
of saying hi on the streets? No, not even? No, no.
Some family members. It took a long time to get over
it. I can imagine. Brent's dad was a senior in high
school. What kind of treatment did he receive?
Well, he didn't know it. We didn't tell him, but
he was guarded everywhere he went. Undercover?
Oh, yeah. He was guarded everywhere he went from
the time he left the house until the time he got back
until school was up the following year. Then he
went to the University of Arkansas the following
fall. Did he receive any flak there from the
students, or he was just another student then? So
how long after your term did you stay in Little
Rock? Or did you leave because of this? No, no, no,
no. I had decided that, well,
it became controversial, obviously. I decided to
run for governor and prepared to file.
I realized that because of the position I had taken
in this matter right or wrong, that the chance of
being elected was practically nil. And so I
decided against filing for nomination or
election.
I had been thinking some time about moving our real
estate business to a larger community. And I think
probably
what happened
probably expedited it to some extent because we
did business statewide.
I couldn't discuss business if we were talking
about politics. How large was Little Rock at this
time? Little Rock was about, at that time, was
about 125,000, 135,000 people. But I felt at that
particular time that I had a, because I was in the
office at the time, I had a moral responsibility. I
had a Christian responsibility and a legal
responsibility, constitutional
responsibility. And I did what I did because I felt
that it was right that they were human beings, not
animals, regardless of color.
I felt that the Christian... The true Christian
would have done what I did, regardless of
consequences. And the Constitutional State of
Arkansas, and all other states, says that, by law,
that the chief executive of any city, any city, has
two primary responsibilities. That is to protect
the lives of people and protect property. I had no
choice. I had no choice. And I knew when I did it that
I had to pay a price, and my family had to pay a price.
But I did the same thing a little bit. And I didn't
necessarily agree. In fact, I think the greatest,
one of the greatest tragedies in the United States
in the history of this country was when the Supreme
Court made the decision to do away with separate
pedigree besides education. I'll always be. You
believe it should have remained separate but
equal? To this day, I believe. Because of the
controversy? No, because I think it's the right
thing to do. You can't force people. You can't
force people to do something they don't want to do.
You can't force people to associate if they don't
want to. You can't do it. And we forced, when they
made that decision, and they were forcing people,
black and white, all colors, They were forcing
people to associate, and you can't do it. I think
you have a choice. I think you should have a choice
to choose who you want to be your friend and who you
want to be with. You can't legislate by law who your
friends are going to be. And that's exactly what
it's all about. And to this day, to this day,
they're doing it. Busing, for example, is the
greatest, most expensive...
thing this country has to do. When you see kids that
live in a block or two of a school and have to get on a
bus and ride 25 or 30 miles to go to some school, they
don't want to, you know. Again, you're taking the
children of this country and you're forcing them
to do something that they don't want to do. That's
not right. It wasn't right then, it's not right
today. When we get enough men and women with enough
backbone to go to Washington, D.C. and change it,
you know, then this country will... and take a step
forward and straighten itself out. And we're in a
heck of a mess today on so-called civil rights. You
mean change busing or change the whole separate
but equal? That's just one thing. That's just one
thing. I think we've already pressed the point now
that they're not going to, that we'll always have,
we'll always have, in my opinion now, some type of
integrated education. By choice or by? Well. It's
been 30 years. I don't think we can go backwards.
But if we could, if we could legally, and I thought
that there was enough vote in the Senate and House
two years ago that it was going to happen. But if we
could do it with a bunch of children in distant
schools and require, make it where... They go to
schools in their community, you know, that we
would go a long ways toward getting over the
bitterness that we have. And it's there today.
It's there and it's going to remain there. Do you
feel like the bitterness has recited some that the
kids my age, like 20 and younger, are less, I mean
much less, a significant amount less bitter than
the kids that were in high school when you were
mayor? I don't think so. You don't think so? You
don't think that there's that much difference
between now and then? I know people today that...
Their children happen to get on buses and ride 10,
15, 20 miles away to school. And not only do the kids
resent it, but the parents resent it very much. And
if they're in a position financially, many, many,
many of them are sending their kids to private
schools for that reason. So when people talk about
desegregation, integration, in the past tense of
something that's been accomplished, you would
disagree with that? Oh, yes. Most definitely. Has
not been accomplished. And in my opinion, never
will be accomplished,
100%. So, okay. Because you're forcing people to
do something they don't want to do. I agree with
you. Do you have anything else that we left out?
Anything about your views? Well, my views
really...
haven't changed in 30 odd years. I've never said
anything publicly, as I told you before.
I went for every year for 15 or 20 years. When
September rolled around, people all over the
country, media of various types, would try to run
me down. and seek an interview and get public
statements, and I refused to do it. And still
would. And still would. I know when I think the 25th
anniversary occurred here two or three years ago.
I had, out of New York and California, major
television personnel trying to come to Houston
and interview me. And see how your views have
changed, if at all? I haven't said anything
publicly, and
I've moved to a different district. After you left
Arkansas, did you move to Houston? Yes. And set up
your business there. And then did you live out here
at Madisonville for a while? I mean, y'all had a
house over that. We have a ranch up here, a horse
ranch, and we released the place in January of 82.
And the intent was to build a house here and to live
here and still have my business operation in
Houston. I had an accident and it became
impossible. But I will eventually do so. Move back
to Madisonville? Do you have anything else? Did I
forget anything? Do you have anything to say about
the people or the organizations? Anything that
we... Maybe we didn't elaborate on enough. The
organizations, even the white citizens'
councils, did they, and the Ku Klux Klan? Well, of
course, the Ku Klux Klan has been, they've been all
based on day one, you know. They were such a radical
group that
they should have never existed. The NAACP, not
quite as bad, but to some extent so biased that
their real purpose for formation and even Martin
Luther King, the same kind of a situation, you
know, the same kind of a situation. I think the very
fact that he's eulogized as such a national hero
today is because
he got involved in the stuff that he did and became
an ineffector, inciting people to do things that
at that particular time were not acceptable,
trying to rush things too fast.
Do you feel like the black people had had enough? I
mean, had it up to where they couldn't stand
anymore, and that's why they tried to rush things
through? They just wanted everything at once? Or
do you just feel like they... I know there's only a
handful of people, percentage-wise, in any given
cause that will...
become involved to the extent that they give their
organization or their particular race a bad name,
whether it's civil rights, whether it's
organized labor, or this, this, or that, or so
forth and so on. There's only a handful of people
that are troublemakers. By and large, a great
majority of people are reasonable and sensible,
and they won't get out in front I think that applies
to the Key question plan, the NAACP, and so forth.
Okay. You can't think of anything else, can you?
No. Thank you. You're welcome.